this is democracy now democracynow.org
the quarantine report I'm Amy Goodman
we're broadcasting from New York City
the epicenter of the corona virus
pandemic the u.s. itself is now the
worldwide epicenter with one person
dying of kovat 19 every 47 seconds
nearly 16,000 700 coronavirus deaths
have been recorded in the United States
with the number of confirmed cases
approaching half a million more than
Italy Spain and France combined of
course the true rate of infections is
far far higher due to a critical lack of
testing this comes as the Labor
Department said Thursday over six point
six million Americans filed for
unemployment benefits over the past week
as the pace and scale of US job losses
is set to rival the Great Depression
well for more on the political
implications of this unprecedented
moment we turn today to Noam Chomsky for
the hour the world renowned political
dissident linguist and author laureate
professor in the Department of
linguistics at the University of Arizona
Tucson professor emeritus at
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
where he taught for more than 50 years
his recent books include global
discontents conversations on the rising
threats to democracy who rules the world
and rec room for the American dream the
ten principles of concentration of
wealth and power Noam Chomsky joined us
for a conversation Wednesday for from
his home in Tucson Arizona where he is
sheltering in place with his wife
Valerio this was just before senator
Bernie Sanders announced he's suspending
his campaign before the Democratic
presidential nomination making former
Vice President Joe Biden the presumptive
nominee to face Donald Trump in the
November election I began by asking
Professor Chomsky about what's happening
right now in the context of the 2020
elections and what he sees happening in
November if Trump is reelected it's
indescribable disaster it means that the
policies of the past four years which
have been extremely destructive to the
American population to the world will be
continued
and probably accelerated the what this
is going to mean for health is bad
enough I just mentioned The Lancet
figures it will get worse
what this means for the environment or
the threat of nuclear war which no one
is talking about but is extremely
serious is indescribable
suppose Biden is elected my I would
anticipate it would be essentially a
continuation of Obama nothing was very
great but at least not a totally
destructive and opportunities for an
organized public to change what is being
done to impose pressures it's common to
say now that the Sanders campaign failed
I think that's a mistake I think it was
an extraordinary success completely
shifted the arena of debate and
discussion issues that were unthinkable
a couple of years ago are now right in
the middle of attention the the the
worst crime he committed in the eyes of
the establishment is not the policies
proposing it's the fact that he was able
to inspire popular movements which had
already been developing the occupy black
lives matter or many others and turned
them into an activist movement which
doesn't just show up every couple of
years to push a lever and then go home
but applies constant pressure constant
activity
and so uh that could affect a Biden
administration it could also even if
it's just a holding action it means
there's time to deal with the major
crises
it's very take Medicare for all the
other major plank and Sanders program
and free college education across the
whole mainstream spectrum all the way to
what's called the left in the mainstream
this is condemned as too radical for
Americans just think what that means
that's an attack on American culture and
society which you would expect from some
hostile enemy what it's saying is it's
too radical to say that we should rise
to the level of comparable countries
they all have some form of national
health care the Muslim have pre higher
education the best performing countries
nationally like Finland free Germany
free right to our South Mexico for
country I call any higher education free
so to say we should rise to the level of
the rest of the world is considered too
radical for Americans some astonishing
comment as I say it's a critique of
America that's you'd expect from some
super hostile enemy that's the left of
the spectrum tells you that we have
really deep problems
so not just Trump if he's made it much
worse but the problems go much deeper
just like say the ventilator catastrophe
which I described
based on good capitalist logic with the
extra hammer blow of making the
government ineffectual to do all the
things this is much deeper than Trump
and we have to face those facts some do
I'm sure you reported I don't remember
you've probably reported the setting of
the Doomsday Clock in January okay yes
notice what happened all through Trump's
term the minute hand of the Doomsday
Clock the best general assessment we
have over the state of the world moved
closer to midnight termination reached
the highest point ever this January it
exceeded it the analysts gave up minutes
moved two seconds a hundred seconds to
midnight thanks to Donald Trump and the
Republican Party which is just monstrous
no longer qualifies as a political party
and simply sheepishly echoes everything
the master says no zero integrity just
amazing to watch he surrounded himself
by a collection of psycho fans who just
that repeat worshipfully everything he
says real major attack on democracy has
alongside the attack on survived of the
survival of humanity to quote JPMorgan
Chase again the nuclear war raising the
threat of nuclear war the dismantling
the arms control system which is to some
extent they protected us from total
disaster astonishing to watch the same
memo that I quoted about how the
policies were following are leading or
risking the survival of humanity
by arguing that the bank should cut back
its fossil fuel support in part because
of its the reputational consequences
their reputation is being harmed what
does that mean that means that activists
are putting pressure on them then they
have to maintain some kind of reputation
now that's very that's a good lesson and
it works that we've seen some very
striking examples that takes a the grain
new deal a couple of years ago that was
an object of ridicule that was mentioned
at all a some form of green New Deal is
essential for the survival of humanity
now it's part of the general agenda why
activist engagement especially sunrise
movement curve of young people acted
significantly up to the point of sitting
in and congressional offices they
received support from Alexandria
LoCascio Cortes other young legislators
who came into office as part of the
Sanders inspired that popular wave
another great success
Edie Markey senator from Massachusetts
joined in now it's part of the
legislative agenda the next step is to
force it through in some viable form and
there are very good ideas as to how to
do that oh that's the way things can
change with a presidency that would be
if not a strongly sympathetic
administration at least one that's can
be reached can be pressured and that's
very important they need to look over
the but the very good labor historian
I'm sure you know Eric Loomis who's
studied the efforts by working people to
carriage the Institute changes in the
society eight sometimes for themselves
sometimes of the society generally and
he's pointed out it made an interesting
point
these efforts succeeded when there was a
tolerant or sympathetic administration
not when there wasn't that's a big one
of many enormous differences between
Trump the sociopath and by who's kind of
a pretty empty can push him one way or
another this is the most crucial
election in human history literally
another four years of Trump and we're in
deep trouble as we continue my interview
with Noam Chomsky I asked him how the
United States the wealthiest country in
the world has become the epicenter of
the pandemic the United States is the
countries have reacted to this in many
ways that's some very successfully some
more or less successfully one is at the
bottom of the barrel
that's us the United States is the only
major country that cannot even provide
data to the World Health Organization
because it's so dysfunctional there's a
background now part of the background is
the scandalous healthcare system which
simply is not ready for anything that
out of the normal simply doesn't work
the this is exacerbated by the strange
collection of gangsters in Washington
who have it's almost as if they
systematically took every possible step
to make it as bad as possible through
Trump's terms last four years it has
been systematically cutting back on all
of the health related aspects of the
government pentagon goes though the
building as a wall goes up but anything
actually anything that might benefit the
general population goes down
particularly health some of it is almost
surreal so in October for example just
the very exquisite timing he cancelled
completely USA's project predicted skull
that was working in third world
countries also in China to try to detect
new viruses that might turn into the
anticipated Baudette pandemic and in
fact it wasn't anticipated since at
least since the SARS epidemic in 2003 so
we have a kind of combination of factors
and some of them specific in the United
States if we want to ensure or at least
hope to avoid new pandemics which are
very likely to come more serious than
this one part because of the enormous
rising threat of global warming the we
have to look at the sources of this one
and it's very important to think them
through so just roughly to go back
endemics have been
predicting predicted by scientists for
years SARS epidemic was quite serious
thoughtfully it was contained but
vaccines were there was the beginning of
development of vaccines they never
proceeded to the testing phase it was
clear at that time that something more
was going to happen and several
epidemics did but it's not enough to
know that somebody has to pick up the
ball and run with it
who can do it well the drug companies
are the obvious place but they have no
interest in it they follow good
capitalist logic the other good market
signals and there's no profit to be made
and preparing for predicted and
anticipated catastrophe so they weren't
interested at that point
another possibilities the government
could step in old enough to remember the
terror of polio was ended by a
government initiated funded project that
finally led to the Salk vaccine which
was free
No no intellectual property rights Jonas
Salk said it should be as free as the
Sun ok that ended the polio terror a
measles terror and others but the
government couldn't step in now because
there's another particular aspect of the
modern eora the neoliberal blade then
you remember Ronald Reagan's sunny smile
and his little maxim about how
government is the problem not the
solution so the government get at her
there were some efforts nevertheless to
try to prepare for this right now in New
York and other places the doctors and
nurses are forced to make
agonizing decisions about who to kill
not a nice decision to make because they
simply don't have equipment and the main
lack is ventilators huge shortage of
ventilators while the Obama
administration did make an effort to try
to prepare for this and this kind of
that dramatically reveals the kind of
factors that are leading to catastrophe
they contracted with a small company
that was producing high-quality low-cost
ventilators of the company was brought
up by a larger one Covidien which makes
fancy expenses that laters and they
shelf the project that presumably they
didn't want competition with their own
costly ones shortly after that they
turned to the government said they
wanted the contract and the reason was
they was not profitable enough so
therefore no ventilators this is a we
have the same thing in hospitals the
hospitals are under the neoliberal
programs are supposed to be efficient
that meaning no spare capacity just
enough beds to get by and in fact the
plenty of people me included can
testified that even the best hospitals
caused great pain and suffering to
patients even before this broke out
because of this just on time efficiency
concept that was guiding our privatized
for-profit health care system when
anything hits out of the normal that's
just tough luck and this runs across the
system so we have a combination of
capitalist logic which is lethal but
could be controlled but
can't be controlled under the neoliberal
programs which also say the government
can't step into to take pick up the bowl
when the private sector doesn't on top
of that now this becomes specific to the
United States we have a freak show in
Washington but totally dysfunctional
the government which is causing enormous
problems and it's not that nothing was
known a pandemic was anticipated all
through Trump's term even before his
reaction was to cut back preparation for
it
astonishingly this continued even after
the pandemic hit so On February 10th
when it was already serious Trump
released his budget for the coming year
take a look at it the budget continues
the defunding of the Center for Disease
Control and other government
institutions responsible for health
continues to defund them it increases
funding for some things like fossil fuel
the production his new subsidies to the
fossil fuel industries comments as if
the country Simplot maybe not as if the
country is simply run by sociopaths and
the result so we cut back on the efforts
to deal with the pandemic that's taking
shape and we increase the efforts to
destroy the environment in which the
efforts in which the United States under
Trump is in the lead in racing to the
abyss and bear in mind that that's I
don't have to tell you is a far more
serious threat
the
coronavirus this is bad serious
particularly in the United States but
will recover somehow that's the veer
cost that we're not going to recover
from the melting of the polar ice sheets
which is leading to a feedback effect
well-known that increases as they melt
there's less reflective service surface
more absorption and the dark sees the
warming that's melting them increases
that's just one of the factors that's
leading to destruction unless we do
something about it and it's not a secret
just recently for example a couple weeks
ago that are very interesting leaked a
memo from JPMorgan Chase America's
biggest bank which warned that in their
words the survival of humanity is at
risk if we continue on our present
course which included the funding of
fossil fuel industries by the bank
itself said we're endangering the
survival of humanity everyone who's got
eyes open and the Trump administration
is very well aware of this it's
difficult to find words for this I could
say other countries over a first though
it was not a secret
I mean it's become convenient now Trump
is desperately seeking some scapegoat
that he can blame for his astonishing
failures and incompetence the most
recent one is the World Health
Organization that a China bashing
somebody else is responsible but it's
simply on the facts are very clear now
China
very quickly informed the World Health
Organization last December
that they were finding patients with
pneumonia like symptoms with unknown
etiology didn't know what it was about a
week later sent January 7th
they made public the fact to the World
Health Organization in the general
scientific community in the world
the Chinese scientists had found out
what source was the corona virus
resembling the SARS virus they had
identified that they'd sequenced the
genome they were providing the
information of the world the u.s.
intelligence was well aware of it they
were event January in February they're
trying to get somebody in the White
House to pay attention to the fact that
there's a major pandemic and just yes no
nobody could listen Trump was off
playing golf or maybe listening checking
his TV ratings yesterday we learned that
one very high-level official very close
to the administration peter navarro
in late january had sent a very strong
message to the white house saying this
is a real danger but even he couldn't
break through noam you mentioned Peter
Navarro the Trade Representative sending
a memo it just came out in the New York
Times in late January warning of the
corona virus saying that I think
something like up to a million people
could die and Trump took from that
setting a travel ban on China but not
doing a corollary which was ensuring
that the United States had the proper
tests and also had the PPE the
protective personal equipment that
doctors that nurses that the custodial
staff and hospitals needed to stay alive
to treat patients to help the
stay alive and the intelligence agencies
that came out at this time even before
Navarro they were all warning Trump if
you could go back to even two years ago
when he disbanded his pandemic unit
within the National Security Council
said that when he's at the table in
China talking about spending money on
bombs or a wall they're not saying sir
you also have to look at what's
happening here and that unit pandemic
unit not only is about how we deal in
the United States but also ensuring as
the CDC does and other agencies of the
US government that scientists are sent
out to other countries like China to
investigate and to help other countries
because when it comes to a pandemic
we're all in this together so if you
could talk about these early warnings
and why testing and this personal
protective personal equipment it's so
important well remember that it
continued even after the pandemic was
already enforced as the budget proposal
is astonishing this is February 10th
well into the pandemic Trump cuts
further the health-related components of
the government continuing the hit the
they run to the axe just as they were
throughout his term actually his the
clips that you played before are part of
a very clever strategy whether this is
consciously planned or just intuitive I
don't know but the the pattern of simply
making one statement today contradicting
it tomorrow coming out with something
else the next day
is really brilliant it means he's going
to be vindicated
whatever happens he'll have said it and
you shoot arrows at random some other
gonna hit the target and his technique
with the Fox echo chamber and you know
the Worshipful the base is simply tuned
to Fox Limbaugh etc they're just gonna
whatever happened to be right said look
our wonderful president the greatest
president we've ever had our savior knew
it all alone and here was the state
can't miss is very much like the
technique of producing constant lies he
you know I don't even have to go through
it the sinuous fact-checkers taught them
up I think it's maybe 20,000 by now or
something and he's laughing all the way
this is perfect you tell constant lies
what happens is the concept of truth
just disappears
so Noam Chomsky world renowned political
dissident well-known linguist author
activists as you listen to the Fox News
this is not just a channel these are the
people that President Trump channels
these are perhaps his senior advisors as
they continually played this down do you
hold president Trump responsible would
you say he has blood on his hands
there's no question Trump makes some
crazy statement then amplified by the
Fox News echo chamber the next day he
says the opposite that sex ed that's the
echo chamber amplifies that notice that
the tone the tone of the reporting is
interesting it's all with
that confidence not what any sane
rational person would say that we really
don't know there's a lot of uncertainty
this is the way things look today was
nothing like that absolute confidence no
matter what it what the dear leader says
we amplify it and it's a interesting
dialogue they amplify what he says Sean
Hannity can say this is the greatest
move that was ever made in the history
of the world
the next morning Trump Tunes in to Fox &
Friends
listens to whatever said that becomes
his thought for the day that's an
interaction Murdock and Trump moving
literally to try to destroy the country
and destroy the world because in the
background we should not never forget is
a far greater threat that is coming
closer and closer while Trump is leading
the way of to destruction he has some
assistance so dumb on the southern part
of the hemisphere there's another madman
the new junior bull Sonora is trying to
vie with Trump to see who can be the
worst criminal in on the planet he's
telling the Brazilians it's nothing it's
just a cold
the Brazilians don't get viruses that
were immune to them his Health Minister
and other officials are trying to butt
in and say look this is really serious
the governor's many of them fortunately
are ignoring what he says but Brazil is
facing a terrible crisis it's actually
gotten to the point where in the favelas
you know these miserable slums and a
real the where the government does
nothing for the people
others have intervened to try to impose
sensible restrictions insofar as it's
possible under those miserable
conditions who the crime gangs the crime
gangs that torture the population have
moved in to try to impose health
standards the indigenous population is
facing a virtual genocide which won't
bother Molinaro he doesn't think they
should be there anyway that mean while
that while all this is going on the
scientific papers are coming out a
warning that in 15 years the Amazon is
going to shift from being a net carbon
sink to a net co2 emitter that's
devastating for Brazil in fact for the
whole world so we have the Colossus of
the north as it's cold in the hands of
sociopaths who are doing whatever they
can to harm the country and the world
and the Colossus of the south as it's
been cold is in its own way doing the
same thing I can I'm able to follow this
pretty closely because my wife Valera is
Brazilian and keeps me up to date with
the news that's coming out in Brazil and
it's simply shocking to see that
meanwhile other countries are reacting
sensibly so as soon as the news started
coming out from China and there was
plenty of news right away contrary to
what is being claimed the countries on
the Chinese periphery have began to
react that Taiwan South Korea Singapore
been quite effectively
some of them now that basically under
control that New Zealand has apparently
cost the crisis even coronavirus maybe
almost completely
with a lockdown right away that
immediate lockdown for a couple of weeks
and seems to have come close to ending
you looking to Europe the most you
Europe just dithered but some countries
the better organized countries did act
right away oh it's very striking it
would be very useful for Americans to
compare Trump's ravings of the kind you
illustrated with Angela Merkel's
German Chancellor sober factual account
of speak talk to the German people
describing exactly what's happening and
what has to be done no we only have a
minute but I wanted to ask you as we
speak to you at your home in Tucson
Arizona where you are sheltering at home
where you are staying at home because we
are in the midst of this pandemic to
prevent community spread and to protect
yourself and your family what gives you
hope well I should say that I'm
following a strict regimen because my
wife valaria is taking charge and I
follow her orders
so Valerio and I are and a striated
isolation but what gives me hope is the
actions that popular groups are taking
all over the world many of them some of
them are there are some things
happenings that are truly inspiring that
takes the doctors and the nurses who are
working overtime under extremely
dangerous conditions lacking especially
in the United States lacking even
minimal support being compelled to make
these agonizing decisions about who to
kill tomorrow what they're doing it
it's just it's an inspiring tribute to
the resources of the human spirit a
model of what can be done along with the
popular actions the moves to create a
progressive international but these are
all very positive signs I could look
back in recent history there have been
times where things looked really
hopeless and desperate I can go back to
my early childhood the late 30s early
40s it looked as though the rise of the
Nazi plague was inexorable the victory
after victory it looks like he couldn't
stop it is the most horrible development
in human history well turns out I didn't
know that at the time that u.s. planners
were expecting that the post-war world
would be divided between a u.s.
controlled world and a German controlled
world including all of Eurasia a
horrifying idea well was overcome there
with another series the civil rights
movement a young
Freedom Riders going out into the
Alabama to try to encourage black
farmers to go to vote despite the threat
serious threat of being murdered and
being murdered themselves these were
some this is examples of what humans can
do
and have done and we see many signs of
it today and that's the basis for hope
Noam Chomsky world-renowned political
dissident linguist author speaking to us
from Tucson where he is now sheltering
at home laureate professor University of
Arizona taught at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology for more than
half a century that does it for our show
amidst the pandemic we still want to
wish a very safe and healthy birthday to
democracy now is David prude and Uzbek
and Maria teresina Democracy Now is
working with as few people on site as
possible majority of our amazing team is
working from home
thanks to all I'm Amy Goodman be safe
you